federalist 55
the total number of the house of
representatives from the new york packet
friday february 15 1788
hamilton or madison
to the people of the state of new york
the number of which the house of
representatives is to consist forms
another and a very interesting point of
view under which this branch of the
federal legislature may be contemplated
scarce any article indeed in the whole
constitution seems to be rendered more
worthy of attention by the weight of
character and the apparent force of
argument with which it has been assailed
the charges exhibited against it are
first that so small a number of
representatives will be an unsafe
depository of the public interests
secondly that they will not possess a
proper knowledge of the local
circumstances of their numerous
constituents
thirdly that they will be taken from
that class of citizens which will
sympathize least with the feelings of
the mass of the people and be most
likely to aim at a permanent elevation
of the few on the depression of the many
fourthly that defective as the number
will be in the first instance it will be
more and more disproportionate by the
increase of the people and the obstacles
which will prevent a correspondent
increase of the representatives
in general it may be remarked on this
subject that no political problem is
less susceptible of a precise solution
than that which relates to the number
most convenient for a representative
legislature nor is there any point on
which the policy of the several states
is more at variance whether we compare
their legislative assemblies directly
with each other or consider the
proportions which they respectively bear
to the number of their constituents
passing over the difference between the
smallest and largest states as delaware
whose most numerous branch consists of
21 representatives and massachusetts
where it amounts to between 3 and 400 a
very considerable difference is
observable among states nearly equal in
population
the number of representatives in
pennsylvania is not more than one-fifth
of that in the state last mentioned new
york whose population is to that of
south carolina as six to five has little
more than one-third of the number of
representatives as greater disparity
prevails between the states of georgia
and delaware or rhode island
in pennsylvania the representatives do
not bear a greater proportion to their
constituents than of one for every four
or five thousand
in rhode island they bear proportion of
at least one for every thousand and
according to the constitution of georgia
the proportion may be carried to one to
every ten electors and must unavoidably
far exceed the proportion in any of the
other states
another general remark to be made is
that the ratio between the
representatives and the people ought not
to be the same or the latter are very
numerous as where they are very few
were the representatives in virginia to
be regulated by the standard in rhode
island they would at this time amount to
between four and five hundred and twenty
or thirty years hence to a thousand
on the other hand the ratio of
pennsylvania if applied to the state of
delaware would reduce the representative
assembly of the latter to seven or eight
members
nothing can be more fallacious than to
found our political calculations on
arithmetical principles 60 or 70 men may
be more properly trusted with a given
degree of power than six or seven but it
does not follow that six or seven
hundred would be proportionably a better
depository
and if we carry on the supposition to
six or seven thousand the whole
reasoning ought to be reversed the truth
is that in all cases a certain number at
least seems to be necessary to secure
the benefits of free consultation and
discussion and to guard against too
easier combination for improper purposes
as on the other hand the number ought at
most to be kept within a certain limit
in order to avoid the confusion and
intemperance of a multitude
in all very numerous assemblies of
whatever character composed passion
never fails to rest the scepter from
reason had every athenian citizen been a
socrates every athenian assembly would
still have been a mob
it is necessary also to recollect here
the observations which were applied to
the case of biennial elections for the
same reason that the limited powers of
the congress and the control of the
state legislatures justify less frequent
elections than the public safety might
otherwise require the members of the
congress need be less numerous than if
they possessed the whole power of
legislation and were under no other than
the ordinary restraints of other
legislative bodies
with these general ideas in mind let us
weigh the objections which have been
stated against the number of members
proposed for the house of
representatives
it is said in the first place that so
small a number cannot be safely trusted
with so much power
the number of which this branch of the
legislature is to consist at the outset
of the government will be 65. within
three years a census is to be taken when
the number may be augmented to one for
every 30 000 inhabitants and within
every successive period of ten years the
census is to be renewed and
augmentations may continue to be made
under the above limitation
it will not be thought an extravagant
conjecture that the first census will at
the rate of one for every thirty
thousand raised the number of
representatives to at least one hundred
estimating the negroes in the population
of three-fifths it can scarcely be
doubted that the population of the
united states will by that time if it
does not already amount to three
millions
at the expiration of 25 years according
to the computed rate of increase the
number of representatives will amount to
200 and of 50 years to 400
this is a number which i presume will
put an end to all fears arising from the
smallness of the body i take for granted
here what i shall in answering the
fourth objection hereafter show that the
number of representatives will be
augmented from time to time in the
manner provided by the constitution
on contrary supposition i should admit
the objection to have very great weight
indeed
the true question to be decided then is
whether the smallness of the number as a
temporary regulation be dangerous to the
public liberty whether 65 members for a
few years and 100 or 200 for a few more
be a safe depository for a limited and
well-guarded power of legislating for
the united states
i must own that i could not give a
negative answer to this question without
first obliterating every impression
which i have received with regard to the
present genius of the people of america
the spirit which actuates the state
legislatures and the principles which
are incorporated with the political
character of every class of citizens i
am able to conceive that the people of
america in their present temper or under
any circumstances which can speedily
happen will choose and every second year
repeat the choice of 65 or 100 men who
would be disposed to form and pursue a
scheme of tyranny or treachery
i am unable to conceive that the state
legislatures which must feel so many
motives to watch and which possess so
many means of counteracting the federal
legislature would fail either to detect
or to defeat a conspiracy of the latter
against the liberties of their common
constituents
i am equally unable to conceive that
there are at this time or can be at any
short time in the united states any 65
or 100 men capable of recommending
themselves to the choice of the people
at large who would either desire or dare
within the short space of two years to
betray the solemn trust committed to
them
what change of circumstances time and a
fuller population of our country may
produce requires a prophetic spirit to
declare which makes no part of my
pretensions but judging from the
circumstances now before us and from the
probable state of them within a moderate
period of time i must pronounce that the
liberties of america cannot be unsafe in
the number of hands proposed by the
federal constitution
from what quarter can the danger proceed
are we afraid of foreign gold
if foreign gold could so easily corrupt
our federal rulers and enable them to
ensnare and betray their constituents
how has it happened that we are at this
time a free and independent nation
the congress which conducted us through
the revolution was a less numerous body
than their successors will be they were
not chosen by nor responsible to their
fellow citizens at large though
appointed from year to year and recalled
at pleasure
they were generally continued for three
years and prior to the ratification of
the federal articles for a still longer
term
they held their consultations always
under the veil of secrecy they had the
sole transaction of our affairs with
foreign nations through the whole course
of the war they had the fate of their
country more in their hands than it is
to be hoped will ever be the case with
our future representatives and from the
greatness of the prize at stake and the
eagerness of the party which lost it it
may well be supposed that the use of
other means then force would not have
been scrupled yet we know by happy
experience that the public trust was not
betrayed nor has the purity of our
public councils in this particular ever
suffered even from the whispers of
calumny
is the danger apprehended from the other
branches of the federal government but
where the means to be found by the
president or the senate or both their
emoluments of office it is to be
presumed will not and without a previous
corruption of the house of
representatives cannot more than suffice
for very different purposes
their private fortunes as they must all
be american citizens cannot possibly be
sources of danger
the only means then which they can
possess will be in the dispensation of
appointments
is it here that suspicion rests her
charge
sometimes we are told that this fund of
corruption is to be exhausted by the
president in subduing the virtue of the
senate now the fidelity of the other
house is to be the victim the
improbability of such a mercenary and
perfidious combination of the several
members of governments standing on as
different foundations as republican
principles will well admit and at the
same time accountable to the society
over which they are placed ought alone
to quiet this apprehension but
fortunately the constitution has
provided is still further safeguard
the members of the congress are rendered
ineligible to any civil offices that may
be created or of which the emoluments
may be increased during the term of
their election no offices therefore can
be dealt out to the existing members but
such as may become vacant by ordinary
casualties and to suppose that these
would be sufficient to purchase the
guardians of the people selected by the
people themselves is to renounce every
rule by which events ought to be
calculated and to substitute an
indiscriminate and unbounded jealousy
with which all reasoning must be vain
the sincere friends of liberty who give
themselves up to the extravagances of
this passion are not aware of the injury
they do their own cause
as there is a degree of depravity in
mankind which requires a certain degree
of circumspection and distrust so there
are other qualities in human nature
which justify a certain portion of
esteem and confidence
republican government presupposes the
existence of these qualities in a higher
degree than any other form
were the pictures which have been drawn
by the political jealousy of some among
us faithful likenesses of the human
character the inference would be that
there is not sufficient virtue among men
for self-government and that nothing
less than the chains of despotism can
restrain them from destroying and
devouring one another
publius